---
layout: post
title:  "Do your ears Hang low, do they wobble to and fro?"
date:   2015-01-29 15:18:49
---
 

##How to care for those adorable floppy ears


##Avoid ear problems with routine maintenance
---------------------------------

Because of the shape of our pets’ ear canals, they are particularly prone to ear problems. Bacteria, viruses, yeast and many parasites thrive in a warm, moist (and dirty) environment. Cleansing your pet’s ears should be a weekly ritual from a very young age. Cleaning ears and allowing adequate air circulation is especially important for dogs with long or floppy ears.


###Tips for care

* Gently pull the earflap upward to straighten the ear canal. Squirt an ear cleaning solution into your pet’s ear and massage the base of the ear between your thumb and forefinger for 20 to 25 seconds. This ensures that the cleansing solution gets a bit deeper into the ear. We recommend a natural ear cleaner for this step.
* Let your pet shake out the extra solution, then get him relaxed again for the next step.
* Use a soft cloth to remove excess wax and debris that the solution and shaking have brought up. Do not insert anything down the ear canal.
* After cleaning, fold earflaps back for about five minutes to dry ear canals, and then finish with a small amount of an ear drying powder.


##Common infections
----------------------------------

Two major types of infections occur in the dog’s ear; most common is otitis externa, an infection of the outer ear, including the ear canal up to the ear drum. More rare is otitis media, an infection of the canal behind the eardrum. All ear infections, if untreated, can lead to consequences that range from mild to severe. Especially in the case of infections behind the eardrum, the condition can lead to deafness, facial paralysis, loss of balance, and other neurological problems, which may be irreversible.



###Signs of ear problems include: 

* Odor
* Scratching or rubbing of the ears and head
* Discharge in the ears
* Redness or swelling of the ear flap or canal
* Shaking the head or tilting it to one side
* Pain around the ears
* Changes in behavior such as depression or irritability


##What causes ear infections? 
----------------------------------

Ear infections are caused by a variety of factors. It is important to note that the more serious condition of otitis media is often the direct result of an untreated case of outer ear infection.

* Bacteria and yeast
* Moisture in ear canal following bathing or swimming
* Ear mites
* Allergies
* Foreign bodies (such as plan awns)
* Injury
* Hormonal abnormalities, or any kind of compromised immunity

In short, anything that can cause itching may lead to intense scratching and trauma, which can open the door to a serious infection.

>"Prevention begins with a regimen of care to keep the outer ears clean and free of debris."

Prevention begins with a regimen of care to keep the outer ears clean and free of debris. Dry ears after bathing/swimming, (make sure not to get water in the ears while bathing your pet). Allergies must be controlled, and any ear mite infections treated. All possible conditions that could lead to ear infections must be assessed and treated by your veterinarian to prevent bacteria and yeast from gaining a foothold.

Your veterinarian can teach you how to provide ongoing care and suggest products to use to keep your dog’s outer ears clean. Along with controlling mites and allergies, this is an effective strategy for keeping ear infections at bay. Not all ear problems can be prevented. If caught early, however, treatment is generally successful.


Sparky

<svg>
  <use xlink:href="#paw"></use>
</svg>
